PLAYING POOL WITH π
(THE NUMBER π FROM A BILLIARD POINT OF VIEW)

Procedure
Consider two point-like balls with masses m and M , M  m. The balls will move along the positive
x-axis and collide with each other at every encounter, and the small ball, m, will reflect off a vertical
wall located at point x = 0.
Each collision in the system is supposed to be absolutely elastic. This means that a collision
between the balls satisfies two mechanical laws: the law of conservation of momentum, and the law
of conservation of kinetic energy. In addition, the small ball reflects from the wall by changing its
velocity vector to the opposite vector. In other words, the wall can be thought of as a non-moving
billiard ball of infinite mass.
Let us follow the following

PROCEDURE:
1. Let N be a fixed positive whole number. Take two billiard balls with the ratio of their masses
M/m = 100 N .
2. Put the small ball, m, between the wall at the origin and the big ball, M .
3. Push the big ball towards the small ball very fast .
4. Calculate the total number of hits in the system: the number of collisions between the balls plus
the number of reflections of the small ball from the wall.
5. Write down the number Π of hits obtained from item #4 on a sheet of paper.
(Note that we do not know a’priori if the number of hits is finite or infinite; we will prove it is
finite.)




Investigation of a particular case

For different values of N the preceding Procedure gives us different values for the number Π (some
of which could perhaps be infinity). Thus Π = Π(N ) is a function of the exponent N of the number
100 N .
Let us investigate the simplest case N = 0, which corresponds to the equality of the masses:
M = m. The laws of conservation yield the following description of the system’s behavior: if one ball
is in the static position and the other one collides with it, then after the collision, the stationary ball
starts moving with exactly the same velocity in the same direction as the second ball moved previously,
while the second ball stops. It looks like the moving ball penetrates through the still ball without
changing its velocity or affecting the still ball 3 .
Then the moving ball hits the wall and reflects from it. The ball’s velocity changes to the opposite
one and, after that, it passes through the “transparent” ball and goes to infinity.
As you can see, the total number of hits in the system with M = m is 3: two collisions and one
reflection. Thus, Π(0) = 3.
Note that 3 is the first digit of π. In what follows, the number of hits, Π, is 31 (two first digits
of π) and 314 (three digits of π) for, respectively, M = 100m and M = 100 2 m, i.e., Π(1) = 31 and
Π(2) = 314.
